initial commit (#3708)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/fusionauth-and-terraform.mdx

---
publish_date: 2025-05-15
title: "Why Use Terraform With FusionAuth"
description: 'Learn why using Terraform with FusionAuth is beneficial.'
authors: Mark Robustelli
image: /img/blogs/fusionauth-and-terraform/fusionauth-and-terraform.png
categories: Tutorial
tags: deployment, terraform, fusionauth, deployment
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

import Aside from '/src/components/Aside.astro';

Let's be honest — the only thing better than a fully working auth system is never having to manually configure it again. Enter FusionAuth and Terraform.

> In this post, you will learn why you would want to use the Terraform provider for FusionAuth. You can ditch the manual clicks and start defining your identity resources as code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, you will learn why you would want to use the Terraform provider for FusionAuth. I'm writing this today. because we recently released[ version 1.0.0 of the Terraform provider](https://github.com/fusionauth/terraform-provider-fusionauth). With Terraform, ditch the manual clicks and start defining your identity resources as code.
```

> <Aside type="tip">TLDR; I just want the guide. You're in luck. FusionAuth just released v1.0.0.0 of the Terraform provider for FusionAuth. You can find the guide on how to use it [here](/docs/operate/deploy/terraform).</Aside>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Aside type="tip">"TLDR; I just want the doc." You're in luck. Find [our guide on how to use Terraform/OpenTofu with FusionAuth here](/docs/operate/deploy/terraform) or [read the FusionAuth Terraform provider docs here](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/FusionAuth/fusionauth/latest/docs).</Aside>
```

> ## Wait... What's Terraform?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Wait... What's Terraform?

```

I think the convention is a newline after a header.

> Terraform is a powerful open-source Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool from HashiCorp. It lets you manage and provision infrastructure and services through human-readable configuration files. Think of it as writing down what your infrastructure should look like and letting Terraform handle the how.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terraform is a powerful Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool from HashiCorp. (OpenTofu is an open-source fork with comparable functionality.) IaC tools let you manage and provision infrastructure and services like databases and servers through human-readable configuration files. They are declarative, which means you write down what your infrastructure should look like and let the tool handle the how.
```

Reviewer: I don't know if mentioning OpenTofu is clutter, but Terraform is no longer open source: https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform/commit/b145fbcaadf0fa7d0e7040eac641d9aef2a26433

Reviewer: You could just mention OpenTofu here and then say that everything you wrote applies just as much to OpenTofu as it does to Terraform, but you're going to refer to Terraform for the rest of the post.

> Whether you're managing a single application or running an identity empire with a dozen tenants, Terraform lets you bring order to the chaos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether you're managing a single application or running an identity empire with thousands of tenants, Terraform lets you bring order to the chaos.
```

> Let's get into it — minimal clicking, maximum control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's get into using Terraform to manage FusionAuth; with this you'll enjoy minimal clicking and maximum control.
```

Loved the phrase, found it a bit hard to parse the sentence.

<div style={{textAlign: "center"}}>

>   <img src="/img/blogs/fusionauth-and-terraform/confirm-button.jpg" alt="Click To Confirm." style={{ display: "block", margin: "0 auto" }} />

Reviewer: Can you do this as markdown? or do you need the styling?

</div>

> ## Why Would I Use Terraform With FusionAuth?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why Would I Use Terraform With FusionAuth?

```

> While FusionAuth has a clean and intuitive interface, there can be a lot of clicks to manage a large number of objects. If you've ever found yourself meticulously clicking through FusionAuth's UI to configure applications, tenants, or identity providers—only to realize you forgot a setting and need to start over—you know the pain of manual identity configuration. FusionAuth makes authentication and user management easy, but managing a growing number of configurations manually can quickly become overwhelming. That's where Terraform comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the FusionAuth admin UI has a clean interface, there can be a lot of clicks to manage its configuration. If you've ever found yourself meticulously clicking through FusionAuth's UI to configure applications, tenants, or identity providers—only to realize you forgot a setting and need to start over—you know the pain of manual identity configuration. FusionAuth makes authentication and user management easy, but managing a growing number of configurations manually can quickly become overwhelming. That's where Terraform comes in.
```

Reviewer: Why would you need to start over if you forgotten a setting? Wouldn't you just set the setting?

With Terraform, you can:

> * **Automate Repetitive Work**. Managing FusionAuth through the UI is great at first. However, as your usage evolves, you'll likely need to do things like duplicate applications that are clones of others, create tenants, configure identity providers and other things on a regular basis. Doing all that manually, especially in multiple environments, is a recipe for mistakes and inconsistency. With Terraform, you define these resources once—in code—and can apply the same configuration across dev, staging, and production with confidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Automate Repetitive Work**. Managing FusionAuth through the UI is great at first. However, as your usage evolves, you'll likely need to do things like duplicate applications that are clones of others, create tenants, configure identity providers and other things on a regular basis. Doing all that manually is a recipe for mistakes and inconsistency. With Terraform, you define these resources once—in code—and can apply the same configuration across dev, staging, and production with confidence.
```

Reviewer: you mention multiple environments below.

> * **Version Control Your Identity Configuration.** Terraform configurations are just text files. That means you can put them in Git. You can review changes through pull requests. You can do other things with your infrastructure that you can do with code as well like rolling back to a previous state or tracking the history of changes. Instead of relying on memory or screenshots in an outdated log file, you'll have the full history clearly documented. While many of the things in this list can be done directly through the [FusionAuth APIs](/docs/apis/), this is one list item the apis don't cover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Version Control Your Identity Server Configuration.** Terraform configuration is just text files. That means you can put them in Git. You can review changes through pull requests. You can do other things with your infrastructure that you can do with code as well like rolling back to a previous state or tracking the history of changes. Instead of relying on memory or screenshots in an outdated log file, you'll have the full history clearly documented. While many of the things in this list can be done directly through the [FusionAuth APIs](/docs/apis/), this is one list item the APIs don't handle.
```

What do you mean "this is one list item the apis don't cover"? Do you mean that you can't get use the APIs to manage configuration changes via Git? You can, but it is more work (you have to use migrations software or create a shell script for each change that you check in).

> * **Ensure Consistency Across Environments** Terraform helps eliminate “it works on my machine” problems by letting you define your FusionAuth setup once and deploy it consistently across all your environments. This is especially valuable if your team is growing or if you're onboarding other developers who need a local instance of FusionAuth configured exactly the same way as everyone else's.

Reviewer: no period at the end of the bold section. Please make consistent.

> * **Disaster Recovery & Repeatability** If something catastrophic happens—someone wipes out the wrong tenant or you need to rebuild a dev environment quickly, you can restore your entire FusionAuth configuration from Terraform code. No digging through docs or clicking through menus; just a few commands and you're back up and running.

Reviewer: no period at the end of the bold section. Please make consistent.

> ## How does it work?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Does It Work?

```

I think we are using title case for all headings. Can you check with the DevDocsReadme and confirm?

As mentioned in the above tip, there is a detailed [guide](/docs/operate/deploy/terraform) on using FusionAuth with Terraform. Here is a high level overview of how the setup works.

> ### Install Terraform and Configure the Provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install Terraform and Configure the Provider

```

First, you install the Terraform CLI and configure the [FusionAuth provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/fusionauth/fusionauth/latest) with your instance's API key and URL. The provider acts as a bridge between your Terraform configurations and FusionAuth's REST APIs.

### Optionally Import Existing Configurations
If you're already using FusionAuth and want to start managing it with Terraform, you can import existing resources into your Terraform state. This lets you bring what's already set up under Terraform's control without wiping it out.

### Define Your Resources in Code
You'll create/update configuration files that define all the FusionAuth resources you want to manage. These could include applications, roles, tenants, lambdas, identity providers, email templates, and more.

> 

Reviewer: Are there any resources you should not define in Terraform? Users or other ephemeral entities like user actions or user registrations are what come to mind.

### Initialize Terraform and Apply Changes
Terraform will validate your config files, figure out what's missing or out of sync, and show you a plan of what it intends to change. Once you approve, Terraform will create, update, or delete resources as needed.

### Repeat Across Environments or Teams
Once your config files are ready, you can reuse them across different environments or share them with other developers to ensure consistency and speed up onboarding.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about how to use Terraform with FusionAuth with [our Terraform guide](/docs/operate/deploy/terraform).
```
